---
title: "Privacy preserving Distributed Hash Tables"
author: "Gon√ßalo Pestana (goncalo@hashmatter.com)"
date: DRAFT
---

*DRAFT: This document is work in progress. Please send your comments, 
suggestions and corrections to gpestana@hashmatter.com*

In this paper we consider privacy threats of Distributed Hash Tables (DHT), more
specifically what data is leaked when requesting content in DHT and how. In 
addition, we consider mechanisms that could prevent private information leakage 
in DHTs and discuss how current projects would benefit from a privacy preserving
DHT.

## Introduction

Distributed Hash Tables are basic building blocks for the decentralized web and
P2P systems. It allows multiple peers to collaboratively function like a hash 
table, where each peer can store and lookup for `key:value` pairs in a P2P,
decentralized network.. Its 
decentralized nature provides scalability and resilience, while, on the other
hand, leaks information about what `key:value` pairs peers are requesting from 
the network. As P2P
and decentralized networks gain popularity, it is important to design and
implement networks which not only preserves its users' privacy, but also do
deliver scalability and performance. Failing to deliver on those properties will
render decentralized networks unusable and unattractive for mass adoption and
applications that can impact positively the current technology landscape.

By design, the same mechanism that made DHT possible to work effectively as 
a scalable and well performing  P2P network is also responsible for leaking 
private information about network peers.

Despite the existence of different flavors of DHTs such as [ref, ref, ..], it is
possible to abstract the DHT lookup mechanism as follows: Consider a lookup
initiator peer `P_i` who wants to access a key `KEY` stored in the network by a
peer `P_store`, which ID is the closet to `KEY` in the network's key domain. The 
lookup initiator maintains a table with a set of peers - its finger table - which
is its current view of the network. First, `P_i`  send a request to its neighbor
peers to return the set of nodes in their finger-table that are closer to `KEY`.
Once `P_i` gets this information, it selects the set of nodes closer to `KEY` ID
and repeats the process. The recursive lookup algorithm makes it possible for
`P_i` to use other peers' finger-tables to resolve the query to `KEY`. 

Although the lookup mechanism in DHTs enables a scalable and churn-resilient P2P
network of cooperative peers, it also leaks information about what data a lookup
initiator is looking for in the network. It is relatively cheap for passive
adversaries to gain information about what a lookup initiator is searching in
the network in two levels: 1) by inspecting intersected lookup request packets
and 2) by following the lookup path of request packets, since it will converge
to the peer whose ID is closest to the lookup key.

In addition to leaking information through the lookup mechanism, once the lookup
initiator resolved `P_store`, `P_i` must directly request the `KEY` from 
`P_store`. Unless there is a mechanism that hides `P_i` ID while, at the same 
time, making it possible for `P_store` to deliver the requested content,
`P_store` will learn that the lookup initiator is interested in `KEY`. 

In this paper, we focus on the privacy threats of passive attackers that gather 
and correlate lookup requests in order to link lookup requests with its peer
initiator and key. We also consider honest peers which may also link peer
initiator and key information due to how DHT lookup mechanism works

## Threat model

We focus on the privacy threat of DHT traffic analysis by passive adversaries 
and nodes which participate honestly in the network.

An adversary controls a set of well-behaving nodes which are part of arbitrary
but well-distributed network segments. Each node collects all routing and lookup
requests from the network, which can be correlated. The adversary can correlate
all collected data to link peer IDs to requested key IDs. The data classes that
allow an adversary to link peer IDs to requested key IDs are:

- **lookup request packets**: The lookup request packets contain information
  about which key a peer ID is looking for.

- **lookup request paths**: By looking at the flow of lookup requests, the
  adversary can understand which segment of the network the requests are
converging to, ultimately leaking information about which key was requested.

By design, an honest peer which stores the pair `key:value` requested will have
access to which peer initiated the request. Although this information is
necessary for replying to `GET` requests, we consider this a privacy threat.

## Desired properties

// see HORNET

- An adversary who controls a fraction of the network nodes is not able to link
  lookup requests to the lookup initiator by passively listening to lookup
requests across network segments and correlate them;

- Peers providing content stored in the network are not able to de-anonymize the
  peer who requested the data.

## Current potential applications

- IPFS

- Hyperswarm

- DHT support on ZeroNet

- Lightening network

- DHT-based relay directory for Tor

- Hidden service directory for Tor

## Privacy preserving mechanisms for DHTs

In this section we outline ideas of mechanisms that would improve privacy in
DHT based on the threat model and goals described in the sections above.

- In-DHT onion routing:

- Friend-to-Friend routing::

## Literature review

## Open questions and future work

## Conclusions
